2015 International Conference on Communication, Information & Computing Technology (ICCICT), Jan. 16-17, Mumbai, India
  978-1-4799-5522-0/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
  I am testing   Vipula Rawte 
Student, M.E. (Computer Engineering) 
St.Francis Institute of Technology 
Mumbai-400103, India. 
rawtevipula25@gmail.com 
G Anuradha 
Associate Professor (Computer Engineering) 
St.Francis Institute of Technology 
Mumbai-400103, India. 
ganusrinu4@yahoo.co.in
  Abstract
ŠFraud is widespread and very costly to the health-
care insurance system. Fraud involves intentional deception or 
misrepresentation intended to result in an unauthorized benefit. 

It is shocking because the incidence of health insurance fraud 
keeps increasing every year. In order to detect and avoid the 
fraud, data mining techniques are applied. This includes some 

preliminary knowledge of health care system and its fraudulent 

behaviors, analysis of the characteristics of health care insurance 
data. Data mining which is divided into two learning techniques 
viz., supervised and unsupervised is employed to detect 

fraudulent claims. But, since each of the above techniques has its 

own set of advantages and disadvantages, by combining the 
advantages of both the techniques, a novel hybrid approach for 
detecting fraudulent claims in health insurance industry is 

proposed.  
KeywordsŠdata mining; health insurance fraud; 
supervised; unsupervised 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 Deliberately deceiving the health insurance company that 
results in healthcare benefits being paid illegitimately to an 

individual or group is known as health insurance fraud. The 

main purpose of fraud is financial benefit. According to a 

recent survey, it is estimated that the number of false claims in 

the industry is approximately 15 per cent of total claims. 

Insurance companies in USA incur losses over 30 billion USD 

annually to healthcare insurance frauds. The statistics is 

appalling in developing country like India as well.  The report 

suggests that the healthcare industry in India is losing 

approximately Rs 600-Rs 800 crores incurred on fraudulent 

claims annually [1]. Frauds blow a hole in the insurance 

industry. Health insurance is a bleeding sector with very high 
claims ratio.  So, to make health insurance industry free from 
fraud, it is necessary to focus on elimination or minimization 

of fake claims arriving through health insurance. 
The health insurance fraud claims are broadly classified 
under the following headings: 
• Billing for services not rendered: Billing insurance 
company for things that never happened. Example: 

Forging the signature of those involved in giving bills. 
• Upcoding of services: Billing insurance company for 
services that are costlier than the actual procedure that 

was done. Example: 45-minute session being billed as 

60-minute session 
• Upcoding of items: Billing insurance company for 
medical equipment that is costlier than the actual 

equipment. Example: Billing for power assisted 

wheelchair while giving the patient only the manual 

wheelchair.   
• Duplicate claims: Not submitting exactly the same bill, 
but changing some small portion like the date in order 

to charge insurance company twice for the same 

service rendered. Example: An exact copy of the 

original claim is not filed for the second time, but 

rather some portion like date is changed to get the 

benefit twice the original. 
• Unnecessary services: Filing claims which in no way 
apply to the condition of a patient. Example: Patient 

with no symptoms of diabetes filing claim for daily 

usage of insulin injections.  
II. DATA 
MINING
 Nowadays there is huge amount of data stored in real-
world databases and this amount continues to grow fast. So, 
there is a need for semi-automatic methods that discover the 
hidden knowledge in such database. Data mining  

automatically filtering through immense amounts of data to 

find known/unknown patterns, bring out valuable new 

perceptions and make predictions.  
Data mining techniques tend to learn models from data. 
There are two approaches on learning the data mining models. 

Those are supervised learning, unsupervised learning; and 

they are described below: 
A. Supervised Learning: 
This is the most usual learning technique wherein the 
model is trained using pre-defined class labels. In the context 

of health insurance fraud detection the class labels may be the 

ﬁlegitimateﬂ and ﬁfraudulentﬂ claims. The training dataset can 
